UMAPs without mitochondria (#1658)
AlexsLemonade/OpenPBTA-analysis: analyses/transcriptomic-dimension-reduction/05-seq-center-mitochondrial-genes.Rmd

                                                    "BGI", "BGI@CHOP Genome Center", "NantOmics"))
}

umap_all <- readr_prep_umap(rsem_umap)
umap_no_mito <- readr_prep_umap(rsem_no_mito_umap) 

# Read in expression and convert to data frame
expression_df <- readr::read_rds(expression_file) %>%
  tibble::as_tibble(rownames = "gene_symbol")

# Read in metadata
metadata_df <- readr::read_tsv(metadata_file)
```

## Explore mitochondrial genes

For mitochondrial genes, do we see expression patterns for BGI@CHOP samples consistent with those posted in the issue linked above?

```{r}
# First, which diagnoses are sequenced at BGI@CHOP?
relevant_groups <- metadata_df %>%
  dplyr::filter(RNA_library == "stranded", 
                stringr::str_starts(seq_center, "BGI")) %>%
  tidyr::drop_na(broad_histology) %>%
  dplyr::pull(broad_histology) %>%
  unique()

# Data frame of log2(FPKM) of mitochondrial genes for relevant diagnoses
mito_seq_center_df <- expression_df %>%
  dplyr::filter(stringr::str_starts(gene_symbol, "MT-")) %>%
  tidyr::gather("Kids_First_Biospecimen_ID", 
                "fpkm", 
                tidyselect::starts_with("BS_")) %>%

>   dplyr::mutate(log2_fpkm = log2(fpkm+1)) %>%

Reviewer: Just want to note my minor discomfort with `+1` as a zero-correction for FPKM, but it does not really matter in this case.

Author: For better or worse, this is all up in OpenPBTA :/

  dplyr::select(cancer_group_display, cancer_group_hex) %>%
  dplyr::distinct() %>%
  tidyr::drop_na()
pal_cg<- cg_df$cancer_group_hex
names(pal_cg) <- cg_df$cancer_group_display
```

Let's plot some UMAPs!

```{r, fig.width = 14, fig.height = 8}
p1 <- plot_umap(umap_all, broad_histology_display, pal_bh, "Includes all genes. Colored by broad histology.") 
p2 <- plot_umap(umap_no_mito, broad_histology_display, pal_bh, "Includes only non-mito genes. Colored by broad histology.")
combine_plots(p1, p2)

p1 <- plot_umap(umap_all, cancer_group_display, pal_cg, "Includes all genes. Colored by cancer group.")
p2 <- plot_umap(umap_no_mito, cancer_group_display, pal_cg, "Includes only non-mito genes. Colored by cancer group.")
combine_plots(p1, p2)
```

## Conclusions

- Samples from `BIG@CHOP` sequencing center have unique mitochondrial gene distributions.
- Removing mitochondtial genes from the UMAP does not have a strong qualitiative effect on whether broad histologies or cancer groups tend to cluster together.
Visually, it seems the "mixed histology" groupings identified in `04-explore-sequencing-center-effects.Rmd`
notebook still are grouped together in these UMAPs.

> Overall, this suggests that mitochondrial genes likely do not have a strong influence on UMAP visualizations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Overall, this suggests that mitochondrial genes alone do not have a strong influence on UMAP visualizations.
However, there may still be protocol differences associated with BIG@CHOP samples that influence expression values more generally, and can not be corrected by removing only mitochondrial genes.
```

Author: >  Before attempting this, we should probably discuss whether it is the right thing to spend time on at this moment.

👍
